alx-system_engineering-devops

What Happens When You Type www.google .com In Your Browser and Press Enter.
 Are you wondering what happens behind the scene when you try to access a website? Let’s discuss about it now:
Immediately you hit “ENTER” after typing www.google.com in your browser (Firefox, Google chrome, Microsoft edge e.t.c) series of backend events occurs which is simplified in this article.
The first event that happens as you hit ‘enter’ is DNS query. Domain name system (DNS) query translate the human-readable domain name (google.com) into an IP address. DNS server receives the request and responds with the IP address associated with the domain name, allowing the browser locate the server hosting the Google website. DNS was introduced because of how hard it is to remember an IP address which contains numbers separated with periods (e.g. 168.168.45.0).
Now with the obtained IP address, the browser establishes a connection using TCP/IP suite. This suite ensures reliability of data transmitted over the network. TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) ensures the data sent from server to browser are reliable. Internet Protocol (IP) is used for identifying a computer on the internet.
Large websies like Google that handles millions of request a day employ the use of multiple servers to handle the influx of request. Hence, to distribute traffic evenly across these servers they use load balancer. Load balancer uses a set of algorithms to distribute incoming requests across group of backend web servers making sure no one server is over loaded.
Now the load balancer sends the request to the next available server which handles the requests and encrypts it using SSL (Secure Socket Layer). SSL secure data transfer between the server and the web browser ensuring that all data transferred between them remains private and secured from eavesdroppers. This security is denoted by the presence of HTTPS:// (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) in a URL.
It’s worthy of not that request sent to web servers pass a firewall which ensures the request isn’t a malicious one that can pose threat to the server. Firewalls are network security device that monitors incoming and outgoing network traffic and filters them based on definite set of rules. If you read very well we spoke mainly establishing connection between the browser and the server. Now let’s continue.
After an established connection the browser request reaches the web server. Here, the request is processed and necessary files and resources are retrieved to generate requested webpage. However, for dynamic content and interactive functionality, an application server may be involved. If required, the web server communicates with the application server which executes scripts to generate dynamic content; or interact with the database server - when the requested information relies on data from database the application server queries the database server. The database server processes the query, retrieved the relevant information and sends it back to the application server. These steps allow websites to provide real-time and up-to-date information to user.
It’s much going on right? We are almost there! With all necessary resources, dynamic content and data in hand the web server constructs an http response containing the requested webpage which is sent back to the client (browser) through the established connection – TCP/IP suite. The browser decrypts the encrypted data using it’s established SSL certificates with the web server. Holla!! The webpage is now displayed by the browser.
Before you get lost in the middle; the summary is that accessing websites involves series of procedures and protocols before the websites is made available to the requesting client. Starting from DNS request, TCP/IP suite, Firewall, Load balancer, SSL, Web server, Application server and then database server.
